On a cold dull March morning we left our home in London for the Waterloo
Station, to go by the London and South-Western line to Southampton, from
thence to Portsmouth to join our ship. After dining at the Ship Hotel,
we went on board the vessel which was to be our abode for four months
and a fortnight. Now, though nearly fifty years have passed, I see the
place and recall the strangeness of it all. The ship was an old East
Indiaman with only four large cabins opening into the saloon or “cuddy,”
as it was then generally called. Our family had two of these, so we were
very well off for room and comfort. We left on 25th March, and were
tossing about the famed Bay of Biscay until 10th April. As I am not
writing a diary of our voyage, I will merely mention its chief
incidents. On the 12th of May, when south of the equator, we sighted a
French vessel bound to Buenos Ayres, that diverged from her course with
the view of “speaking” to us. They invited us to dinner; but on our
refusal, accepted an invitation instead to dine with us. The captain and
two passengers were to be our guests, our boat going for them. They
were most delightful people, and Frenchmen-like, full of compliments to
our cook. As some of our passengers spoke their language fluently, the
result was a very pleasant change in the usual monotony of a long
voyage. Just imagine such a thing being done in these days of steam and
quick passages: the passengers from one vessel dining on board another,
spending a few hours, then returning, and being near enough to hear the
music played on board of each vessel, the Frenchmen vainly trying to
give us “God save the Queen.” We were able to give them the
“Marseillaise” splendidly, having some good musicians on board. On 30th
May we encountered a terrible gale, carrying away part of our bulwarks
on the lee side: during this dreadful weather what was left of our live
stock died. This weather continued till 8th June when off Table Bay, and
we had to lay-to all night. No one thought of sleep. Tales of phantom
ships and wrecks recurred to the nervous. However, about 9 A.M. of the
9th June we anchored safely in the bay. We were unable to land for some
hours, but at last went on shore and took rooms at the George Hotel.
What a rest from the unceasing noise of a ship and all its miseries to
the landsmen! Cape Town was lovely, at least I thought so,--very
different from England, the deep red-clay of the roads, numbers of
natives, strange waggons drawn by bullocks, the mountains for a
background, and now (while off it) the beautiful sea in front. The
bazaar-like shops, strange carriages and horses, the hotel so different
from anything I had ever seen--all come back as a picture, as I write.
We remained at the Cape until the 19th June, and had many drives. In
carriages drawn by six small horses we started for Upper Constantia, Van
R----’s vineyard and wine estate, where there is a well-constructed
house of modern style, elegantly furnished. In the garden there was a
Kaffir’s hut, with clay figures life-size, orange trees, subtropical
fruit trees, and flowers everywhere around. We were conducted through
the cellars, and tasted the wine, which has so great a reputation. We
went also to Lower Constantia, where the vineyard of Van C---- is
situated. This was quite a different style of place, close to the
mountains, with the house, garden, and people of the old Dutch type. In
the cool garden violets, primroses, and other English flowers were
blooming, the last I saw for many a day, and those dearest to me never
saw again. We were delighted with the wildflowers, my father making a
collection for his herbarium,--geraniums, phlox, and many others.
While at the Cape there was a ball given at Government House, to which
some of our passengers went, my father and mother among the number, and
in that out-of-the-way place the former met an old schoolfellow; so even
in those early days, when steam was almost in its infancy, the smallness
of the world was exemplified.
